DEVELOPMENT.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 Digg - Agency for Digital Government

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0
-->

# Development Guide

This guide outlines core essentials you need to know for developing in this project.
This guide outlines core essentials for developing in this project.

## Table of Contents

- [Setup and Configuration](#setup-and-configuration)
  - [IDE Setup](#ide-setup)
  - [Consuming SNAPSHOTS](#consuming-snapshots-from-maven-central)
- [Development Workflow](#development-workflow)
  - [Testing and Verification](#testing-format-and-lint)
  - [Documentation](#documentation)
  - [Pull Request Process](#pull-request-workflow)

## Setup and Configuration

### IDE Setup

By running
[the code quality script](./development/code_quality.sh)
you will get a list of suggested plugins and configuration for various editors and IDEs,
e.g. VS Code and IntelliJ.
Please take a look in
[the generated file](./megalinter-reports/IDE-config.txt)
after running the script.

#### VSCode

 1. Install plugins:

    - [Checkstyle for Java](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=shengchen.vscode-checkstyle)
    - [markdownlint](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=DavidAnson.vscode-markdownlint)
    - [PMD for Java](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=cracrayol.pmd-java)
    - [Prettier](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=esbenp.prettier-vscode)
    - [ShellCheck](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=timonwong.shellcheck)
    - [shell-format](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=foxundermoon.shell-format) version 7.2.5

        **Note 1:** There is
        [a known issue](https://github.com/foxundermoon/vs-shell-format/issues/396)
        with version 7.2.8 of shell-format
        preventing it from being detected as a formatter for shell scripts.
        Please use version 7.2.5 until the issue is fixed.

        **Note 2:** You need to have the `shfmt` binary installed in order to use the plugin.
        On Ubuntu you can install it with `sudo apt-get install shfmt`.

 2. Open workspace settings - settings.json (for example with Ctrl+Shift+P → Preferences: Workspace Settings (JSON)) and add:

    ```json
    "editor.formatOnSave": true,
    "java.checkstyle.configuration": "development/lint/google_checks.xml",
    "java.checkstyle.version": "1x.xx.x",
    "java.format.settings.profile": "GoogleStyle",
    "java.format.settings.url": "development/format/eclipse-java-google-style.xml",
    "javaPMD.rulesets": [
        "development/sast/pmd_default_java.xml"
    ],
    "shellformat.path": "<path to shfmt>",
    "[java]": {
        "editor.defaultFormatter": "redhat.java",
    }
    ```

#### IntelliJ

 1. **Code Style**
    - Settings → `Editor → Code Style → Java`
    - Click gear → `Import Scheme → Eclipse XML Profile`
    - Select `development/format/eclipse-java-google-style.xml`

 2. **Checkstyle**
    - Install "CheckStyle-IDEA" plugin
    - Settings → `Tools → Checkstyle`
    - Click the built-in Google Style Check

## Consuming SNAPSHOTS from Maven Central

Configure your pom.xml file with:

```xml
<repositories>
  <repository>
    <name>Central Portal Snapshots</name>
    <id>central-portal-snapshots</id>
    <url>https://central.sonatype.com/repository/maven-snapshots/</url>
    <releases>
      <enabled>false</enabled>
    </releases>
    <snapshots>
      <enabled>true</enabled>
    </snapshots>
  </repository>
</repositories>
```

## Development Workflow

### Testing, Format and Lint

Run Maven verification:

```shell
mvn clean verify
```

### Documentation

Generate Javadocs:

```shell
mvn javadoc:javadoc
```

View documentation in your browser:

```shell
<browser> target/reports/apidocs/index.html
```

### Pull Request Workflow

When submitting a PR, CI will automatically run several checks. To avoid surprises, run these checks locally first.

#### Pull Request Workflow Prerequisites

- [Podman](https://podman.io/)

#### Running Code Quality Checks Locally

1. Run the quality check script:

   ```shell
   ./development/code_quality.sh
   ```

2. Fix any identified issues

3. Update your PR with fixes

4. Verify CI passes in the updated PR

#### Quality Check Details

- **Linting with megalinter**: BASH, Markdown, YAML, GitHub Actions, security scanning
- **License Compliance**: REUSE tool ensures proper copyright information
- **Commit Structure**: Conform checks commit messages for changelog generation
- **Dependency Analysis**: Scans for vulnerabilities, outdated packages, and license issues
- **OpenSSF Scorecard**: Validates security best practices

#### Handling Failed Checks

If any checks fail in the CI pipeline:

1. Review the CI error logs
2. Run checks locally to reproduce the issues
3. Make necessary fixes in your local environment
4. Update your Pull Request
5. Verify all checks pass in the updated PR

Commit message:

docs: update IDE Setup section
We want to mention that running the code quality script is useful for
downloading required dependencies.

Signed-off-by: Eric Thelin <extern.eric.thelin@digg.se>

DEVELOPMENT.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 Digg - Agency for Digital Government

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0
-->

# Development Guide

This guide outlines core essentials you need to know for developing in this project.
This guide outlines core essentials for developing in this project.

## Table of Contents

- [Setup and Configuration](#setup-and-configuration)
  - [IDE Setup](#ide-setup)
  - [Consuming SNAPSHOTS](#consuming-snapshots-from-maven-central)
- [Development Workflow](#development-workflow)
  - [Testing and Verification](#testing-format-and-lint)
  - [Documentation](#documentation)
  - [Pull Request Process](#pull-request-workflow)

## Setup and Configuration

### IDE Setup

Run the code quality script.

```shell
./development/code_quality.sh
```

This will run the automated test suite
and other automation such as linters and formatters.
As a side effect all required dependencies will be downloaded.
After running the script, please take a look in
[the generated IDE configuration file](./megalinter-reports/IDE-config.txt).
It contains a list of suggested plugins and configuration for various editors and IDEs,
e.g. VS Code and IntelliJ.

#### VSCode

 1. Install plugins:

    - [Checkstyle for Java](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=shengchen.vscode-checkstyle)
    - [markdownlint](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=DavidAnson.vscode-markdownlint)
    - [PMD for Java](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=cracrayol.pmd-java)
    - [Prettier](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=esbenp.prettier-vscode)
    - [ShellCheck](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=timonwong.shellcheck)
    - [shell-format](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=foxundermoon.shell-format) version 7.2.5

        **Note 1:** There is
        [a known issue](https://github.com/foxundermoon/vs-shell-format/issues/396)
        with version 7.2.8 of shell-format
        preventing it from being detected as a formatter for shell scripts.
        Please use version 7.2.5 until the issue is fixed.

        **Note 2:** You need to have the `shfmt` binary installed in order to use the plugin.
        On Ubuntu you can install it with `sudo apt-get install shfmt`.

 2. Open workspace settings - settings.json (for example with Ctrl+Shift+P → Preferences: Workspace Settings (JSON)) and add:

    ```json
    "editor.formatOnSave": true,
    "java.checkstyle.configuration": "development/lint/google_checks.xml",
    "java.checkstyle.version": "1x.xx.x",
    "java.format.settings.profile": "GoogleStyle",
    "java.format.settings.url": "development/format/eclipse-java-google-style.xml",
    "javaPMD.rulesets": [
        "development/sast/pmd_default_java.xml"
    ],
    "shellformat.path": "<path to shfmt>",
    "[java]": {
        "editor.defaultFormatter": "redhat.java",
    }
    ```

#### IntelliJ

 1. **Code Style**
    - Settings → `Editor → Code Style → Java`
    - Click gear → `Import Scheme → Eclipse XML Profile`
    - Select `development/format/eclipse-java-google-style.xml`

 2. **Checkstyle**
    - Install "CheckStyle-IDEA" plugin
    - Settings → `Tools → Checkstyle`
    - Click the built-in Google Style Check

## Consuming SNAPSHOTS from Maven Central

Configure your pom.xml file with:

```xml
<repositories>
  <repository>
    <name>Central Portal Snapshots</name>
    <id>central-portal-snapshots</id>
    <url>https://central.sonatype.com/repository/maven-snapshots/</url>
    <releases>
      <enabled>false</enabled>
    </releases>
    <snapshots>
      <enabled>true</enabled>
    </snapshots>
  </repository>
</repositories>
```

## Development Workflow

### Testing, Format and Lint

Run Maven verification:

```shell
mvn clean verify
```

### Documentation

Generate Javadocs:

```shell
mvn javadoc:javadoc
```

View documentation in your browser:

```shell
<browser> target/reports/apidocs/index.html
```

### Pull Request Workflow

When submitting a PR, CI will automatically run several checks. To avoid surprises, run these checks locally first.

#### Pull Request Workflow Prerequisites

- [Podman](https://podman.io/)

#### Running Code Quality Checks Locally

1. Run the quality check script:

   ```shell
   ./development/code_quality.sh
   ```

2. Fix any identified issues

3. Update your PR with fixes

4. Verify CI passes in the updated PR

#### Quality Check Details

- **Linting with megalinter**: BASH, Markdown, YAML, GitHub Actions, security scanning
- **License Compliance**: REUSE tool ensures proper copyright information
- **Commit Structure**: Conform checks commit messages for changelog generation
- **Dependency Analysis**: Scans for vulnerabilities, outdated packages, and license issues
- **OpenSSF Scorecard**: Validates security best practices

#### Handling Failed Checks

If any checks fail in the CI pipeline:

1. Review the CI error logs
2. Run checks locally to reproduce the issues
3. Make necessary fixes in your local environment
4. Update your Pull Request
5. Verify all checks pass in the updated PR
